SRVCOM-1409: Serverless 1.17.0 release notes (#35500)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/serverless-rn-1-17-0.adoc

[id="serverless-rn-1-17-0_{context}"]
= Release Notes for Red Hat {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0

[id="new-features-1-17-0_{context}"]
== New features

* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Serving 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Eventing 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Kourier 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative `kn` CLI 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Kafka 0.23.0.
* The `kn func` CLI plug-in now uses `func` 0.17.0.

* Changes to API versions in Knative Eventing 0.23.0:

** Version `v1beta1` has been removed from the `eventing.knative.dev`, `messaging.knative.dev` and `flows.knative.dev` APIs. You must ensure that any existing or new resources in your deployment that are created by using these APIs use version `v1`.

** The `v1alpha1` version of the `KafkaChannel` API, which was deprecated in {ServerlessProductName} version 1.14.0, has been removed. If the `ChannelTemplateSpec` of your config maps contain references to this older version, you must update this part of the spec to use the correct API version.

> ** The deprecated `v1alpha1`, `v1alpha2`, and `v1beta1` versions of the `APIServerSource` and `SinkBinding` APIs have been removed. You must update any existing resources to use the correct API versions.

Author: @lberk any update on this?

> ** The deprecated `v1alpha1`, `v1alpha2`, and `v1beta1` versions of the `APIServerSource` and `SinkBinding` APIs have been removed. You must update any existing resources to use the correct API versions.

Reviewer: If I'm reading openshift-knative/serverless-operator#1170 correctly, it seems that we've re-added the declarations, but left them as (for example)
```yaml
name: v1beta1
served: false
storage: false
```
However, I'm not sure if we make that distinction if the docs or we want to just leave it deprecated & removed?
cc/ @devguyio @matzew

> ** The deprecated `v1alpha1`, `v1alpha2`, and `v1beta1` versions of the `APIServerSource` and `SinkBinding` APIs have been removed. You must update any existing resources to use the correct API versions.

Reviewer 2: I think we leave them there only for the purpose of migration. The user still must update any resource that references the old apiVersions to use the new apiVersions.

> ** The deprecated `v1alpha1`, `v1alpha2`, and `v1beta1` versions of the `APIServerSource` and `SinkBinding` APIs have been removed. You must update any existing resources to use the correct API versions.

Author: Not sure if there's anything else actionable here for docs / any required changes? @maschmid @devguyio ?

[id="serverless-rn-1-17-0_{context}"]
= Release Notes for Red Hat {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0

[id="new-features-1-17-0_{context}"]
== New features

* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Serving 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Eventing 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Kourier 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative `kn` CLI 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Kafka 0.23.0.
* The `kn func` CLI plug-in now uses `func` 0.17.0.
* In the upcoming {ServerlessProductName} 1.19.0 release, the URL scheme of external routes will default to HTTPS for enhanced security.
+

> If you do not want this change to apply for your workloads, you can override the default setting before upgrading to 1.19.0, by adding the following YAML to your `KnativeServing` custom resource definition (CRD):

Reviewer 3: I think you do not need the comma after "before upgrading to 1.19.0 by..."

[id="serverless-rn-1-17-0_{context}"]
= Release Notes for Red Hat {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0

[id="new-features-1-17-0_{context}"]
== New features

* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Serving 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Eventing 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Kourier 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative `kn` CLI 0.23.0.
* {ServerlessProductName} now uses Knative Kafka 0.23.0.
* The `kn func` CLI plug-in now uses `func` 0.17.0.
* In the upcoming {ServerlessProductName} 1.19.0 release, the URL scheme of external routes will default to HTTPS for enhanced security.
+
If you would like to begin using HTTPS for external routes by default in earlier versions, you can update the `KnativeServing` custom resource definition (CRD) to contain the following YAML:
+
[source,yaml]
----
...
spec:
  config:
    network:
      defaultExternalScheme: "https"
...

> ----

Reviewer 4: This doesn't work in 1.17 yet, it will only work in 1.18.

Author: OK, I'll just leave in the first line to say it's coming then?

Reviewer 4: Yes, though we might want to tell people how to do the opposite today (even though it will be a noop until 1.19). We can tell them to set the scheme to `http` explicitly, if they want to stick to it after we change the default.

* mTLS functionality is now Generally Available (GA).

* TypeScript templates are now available when you create a function using `kn func`.

> * Changes to API versions in Knative Eventing 0.23.0:
> 
> ** Version `v1beta1` has been removed from the `eventing.knative.dev`, `messaging.knative.dev` and `flows.knative.dev` APIs. You must ensure that any existing or new resources in your deployment that are created by using these APIs use version `v1`.
> 
> ** The `v1alpha1` version of the `KafkaChannel` API, which was deprecated in {ServerlessProductName} version 1.14.0, has been removed. If the `ChannelTemplateSpec` of your config maps contain references to this older version, you must update this part of the spec to use the correct API version.
> 
> ** The deprecated `v1alpha1`, `v1alpha2`, and `v1beta1` versions of the `APIServerSource` and `SinkBinding` APIs have been removed. You must update any existing resources to use the correct API versions.
> 
> ** The deprecated `v1alpha2` and `v1beta1` versions of the `ContainerSource` and `PingSource` APIs have been removed. You must update any existing resources to use the correct API versions.
> 
> ** Version `v1beta2` of the `PingSource` API has been deprecated. References to older versions of this API should be updated to `v1` to prepare your deployment for removal of the deprecated version.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Some older versions of eventing APIs are deprecated as show by the following table and the {ServerlessOperatorName} automatically upgrades older resources to the newest versions:

[cols="^.^d, ^d,^d,^d,^d,^d,^d"]
|===
|||v1alpha1|v1alpha2|v1beta1|v1beta2|v1

.4+|sources.knative.dev
|ApiServerSource|deprecated|deprecated|deprecated|-|current
|ContainerSource|-|deprecated|deprecated|-|current
|PingSource|-|deprecated|deprecated|current|served
|SinkBinding|deprecated|deprecated|deprecated|-|current

.3+|messaging.knative.dev
|Channel|-|-|-|-|current
|InMemoryChannel|-|-|-|-|current
|Subscription|-|-|-|-|current

.3+|eventing.knative.dev
|Broker|-|-|-|-|current
|EventType|-|-|-|current|-
|Trigger|-|-|-|-|current

.2+|flows.knative.dev
|Parallel|-|-|-|-|current
|Sequence|-|-|-|-|current
|===

* Deprecated versions can be removed in any upcoming release and you must update your manifests to use the current version.
```

Here's a proposed updated release notes.

Reviewer 2: I like the table, however it should also convey the information about what has changed exactly in Serverless 1.17 ,  esp. the 
```
"Version `v1beta1` has been removed from the `eventing.knative.dev`, `messaging.knative.dev` and `flows.knative.dev`
```
bit. Perhaps by adding "removed" cells in the table?

Reviewer 5: @maschmid done. Check the comment again.

Author: This table would be a good addition as a reference module higher up in the doc, i.e. before specific release notes, where we keep it updated each release, but to me as a reader, this doesn't at all tell me what the specific changes were for 1.17.0.

I think we should keep the text as is, and add the table as a different reference module that isn't 1.17.0 specific / can be updated.

Author: Also, it's not clear to me what `-` means in the table - does that mean it never existed? It looks odd that some APIs just started life as v1alpha2 or v1beta2. I think in this way the table actually makes things more confusing.

Author: @devguyio still awaiting updates on this as discussed in Slack when you have a minute

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Changes to Knative Eventing API versions:

** The `v1alpha1` version of the `KafkaChannel` API, which was deprecated in {ServerlessProductName} version 1.14.0, has been removed. If the `ChannelTemplateSpec` of your config maps contain references to this older version, you must update this part of the spec to use the correct API version.

=== Notes
* The {ServerlessOperatorName} automatically upgrades older stored resources from their deprecated version to the newest current version (e.g APIServerSource resources will be upgraded to `v1`) 
* Deprecated versions can be removed in any upcoming release and you must update your manifests to use the current version.
* Trying to use any of the removed versions when creating resources will fail. Make sure to use a current version. Using a deprecated version will not fail but it's not recommended since they will be removed at any future release. 

```

Here's a version that describes the changes to the user that's coming in 1.17.

Author: @devguyio I'll add a module to the start of the release notes titled something like "notes on API versions" or something to add these notes to; as per our previous conversations, any general information that applies to all serverless releases should be added somewhere stable as part of the "core" docs, rather than under release notes that only apply for a specific version.
I'll ping you when it's ready for another look.

[id="fixed-issues-1-17-0_{context}"]
== Fixed issues

[id="known-issues-1-17-0_{context}"]
== Known issues

* If you try to use an older version of the Knative `kn` CLI with a newer {ServerlessProductName} release, the API is not found and an error occurs.
+
For example, if you use the 1.16.0 release of the `kn` CLI, which uses version 0.22.0, with the 1.17.0 {ServerlessProductName} release, which uses the 0.23.0 versions of the Knative Serving and Knative Eventing APIs, the CLI does not work because it continues to look for the outdated 0.22.0 API versions.
+
Ensure that you are using the latest `kn` CLI version for your {ServerlessProductName} release to avoid issues.

* If you create a new subscription for a Kafka channel, there might be a delay in the Kafka channel data plane becoming ready to dispatch messages after the newly created subscription reports a ready status. As a result, messages that are sent during the time which the data plane is not reporting a ready status might not be delivered to the subscriber.
+

> The following steps are recommended to mitigate this issue:

Reviewer 6: Id also add some steps on how to recover if we fail to follow mitigate instructions:

```asciidoc
+Recovery options in case of failure to mitigate this problem:
* KafkaSource/KafkaChannel do not delete any data on underlaying Kafka topic.
* If it's possible, deduce the missing data period. If your system tolerates event duplication, you can choose this period with some overlap
* To restore missing parts of the data in downstream of KafkaChannel/KafkaSource you should modify the offsets on appopriate Kafka topic consumer-group
+
[source,bash]
----
$ oc exec -it my-cluster-kafka-0 -n kafka -- /bin/sh
sh-4.4$ bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server <kafkahost:port> \
  --group <group_id> \
  --topic <topic_name> \
  --reset-offsets \
  --to-datetime <XXXX-XX-XXTXX:XX:XX.XXX> \
  --execute
----
+
* Delete pods for KafkaSource, located in the same namespace as KafkaSource. Eventing will recreate them with proper offsets.
* Delete pods for Kafka channel `kafka-ch-controller*` and `kafka-ch-dispatcher*`
```

This makes sense @devguyio ?

![Consumer Group offsets](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/540893/133164136-6c7abc65-8f06-4ab5-ada2-e073945698cf.png)

Reviewer 6: :cry: Tried that, but:

```bash
sh-4.4$ bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.kafka.svc:9092 --group kafka.demo.example.b758f9e2-7e7c-490a-92a9-9d746730fb7a --topic knative-messaging-kafka.demo.example --reset-offsets --to-offset 0 --execute

Error: Assignments can only be reset if the group 'kafka.demo.example.b758f9e2-7e7c-490a-92a9-9d746730fb7a' is inactive, but the current state is Stable.

GROUP                          TOPIC                          PARTITION  NEW-OFFSET 
```

Reviewer 5: That is not always a mitigation and I'd refrain from suggesting it because events replay needs idempotent subscribers. At most we can just suggest "consider resetting the offsets if you have idempotent subscribers" and that's it. I can imagine folks using Kafka in production can very well do a simple offset reset.

Reviewer 6: They can't do it without stopping KnativeKafka elements. They makes the consumer group being in Stable state, and you can't modify offset while it is like that:

```
sh-4.4$ bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.kafka.svc:9092 --group kafka.demo.example.b758f9e2-7e7c-490a-92a9-9d746730fb7a --topic knative-messaging-kafka.demo.example --reset-offsets --to-offset 0 --execute

Error: Assignments can only be reset if the group 'kafka.demo.example.b758f9e2-7e7c-490a-92a9-9d746730fb7a' is inactive, but the current state is Stable.

GROUP                          TOPIC                          PARTITION  NEW-OFFSET
```

Also, I wrote: 
>_If your system tolerates event duplication, you can choose this period with some overlap_

Reviewer 5: > If your system tolerates event duplication, you can choose this period with some overlap
I'm sorry I missed that . 

I think we can tinker on this for long, let's try to stick to generic advises is in the [updated suggestion](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/35500#discussion_r707636599) . 

Since it's not possible to give a specific solution that fits everybody, let's try to stay generic:
1. manual verification when possible
2. automation : event acknowledgment or some other safety measure. 

It's not an ideal situation so I don't think we'll cover all different scenarios here.

Author: >I think we can tinker on this for long, let's try to stick to generic advises as in the updated suggestion .

+1.

I think we're getting way too far off into the weeds and basically starting to scope a troubleshooting section at this point for something that is a temporary known issue.
The point of calling it out as a known issue is that users should expect there to be an issue / the feature might not work right now - we don't need to provide a complete workaround for every single user complete with troubleshooting if the solution doesn't work, IMO.
This should not be expected as part of the scope of a release note, and we need to break the habit of trying to completely document our way around usability issues.

** Schedule a maintenance window for updates, during which the Kafka channel is not expected to receive events.

> ** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.

Reviewer 5: > We can't advise sending test events. That maybe done on testing or staging environment, but any respectable company will not allow such data forging in production!

It really depends heavily on the use case and the technique. Some use cases allow for such manual events ingestion in a production system cause events are ephemeral events. It depends heavily. Definitely we don't recommend them in cases that would invalidate the customer use case. So maybe we can be explicit in the recommendation and add "when possible" or some other wording that make this recommendation conditional. 

> Instead, we should instruct what to check on the environment - I presume checking underlying Kafka topic for committed offsets should be enough of a test that KafkaChannel/KafkaSource is now fully ready.

that is some extra recommendation, there are a lot of specific options we can add so maybe we can generalize them to 'verify events receipt either via safe validation events (heartbeat, ephemeral events, test events) if your use case allows it or via checking Kafka topic for committed offsets'

> ** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.

Reviewer 7: I agree w/ Ahmed here. It all really depends...

> ** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.

Reviewer 5: I updated the suggestion here https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/35500#discussion_r707636599

> ** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.

Reviewer 6: It doesn't. We should provide solution viable for even the most regulated industries, the worst case. Such solution could be used also in less regulated ones.

> ** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.

Reviewer 5: What I meant by "it depends" is whether or not having that advise would lead to "data forging" . And I guess "it depends" means it might be problematic for some use cases, and not be for other use case. So "it does depend".
 
> any respectable company will not allow such data forging in production!

* "Respectable company" IMHO unless we have a definition of "respectable company" in Red Hat, that is a very subjective and fluid term that I have no solid understanding of. I know well known companies that have EDA systems building systems on top of the InMemoryChannel where event loss is possible. Why is that considered invalid?
* "such data forging" that sentence has a huge presumption on the implementation and an exaggeration of the intention of the suggestion. I always get worried when talking in extremes. Maybe the reason is a misunderstanding of the suggestion itself. Definitely the intention was "when applicable". So I'd really appreciate if before stating such strong sentences you'd point out anything I might've missed. I made it more more clear here (is in the updated suggestion abve):
```
verify events receipt either via safe validation events (heartbeat, ephemeral events, test events) if your use case allows it or via checking Kafka topic for committed offsets. After events receipt verification, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual
```

> ** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.

Reviewer 6: Of course, it depends. As I said, it depends on industry, what data is being processed, etc. 

My point on this is, we need to provide a solution for everybody. By adding, just "if possible", we are not telling what to do in "else ..." situation. And its tuns out that many important users, are from financial, or government sectors, and those sectors are usually highly regulated. **We need solution for them as well**.

And if we find a solution that can be used in regulated industries, I think the same solution we can advise to less regulated users as well. And that simplify the whole advise by removing the `if regulated() then ... else ...` structure.

> ** If your subscriptions are being created by using automation, avoid using the current version of Kafka channels included with {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0 for mission critical or time sensitive systems where some issues being lost when subscriptions are created is unacceptable.

Author: @devguyio if this is exactly the same but for source (https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKE-911) I think we can just roll these into one issue; there's no need to duplicate all this, it would be easier to just say it applies for channels and sources. WDYT?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* If you create a new subscription for a Kafka channel, there might be a delay in the Kafka channel data plane becoming ready to dispatch messages after the newly created subscription reports a ready status. As a result, messages that are sent during the time which the data plane is not reporting a ready status might not be delivered to the subscriber.
+
The following steps are recommended to mitigate this issue:
** Schedule a maintenance window for updates, during which the Kafka channel is not expected to receive events.
** If you are creating subscriptions manually, send a few test events to ensure that events are not being lost. After you have confirmed that test events are not being lost, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.
** If your subscriptions are being created by using automation and you're using the current version of Kafka channels included with {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0 for mission critical or time sensitive systems where subscriptions missing events after creation is unacceptable, introduce an acknowledgement technique between the producer and subscribers (e.g. initial heartbeats) that signals the subscriber events recipition.
```

Reviewer 5: > @devguyio if this is exactly the same but for source (https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKE-911) I think we can just roll these into one issue; there's no need to duplicate all this, it would be easier to just say it applies for channels and sources. WDYT?

@abrennan89 yeah I think so too , would be awesome if you can find a way to say Source/Channel and Subscriber/Sink lol but I agree.

Reviewer 5: Updated the suggestion again after the discussion below.

Author: @devguyio made some updates, lmk what you think, still reading through comments

> ** If your subscriptions are being created by using automation, avoid using the current version of Kafka channels included with {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0 for mission critical or time sensitive systems where some issues being lost when subscriptions are created is unacceptable.

Reviewer 5: TBH I don't think we should recommend this change for the KafkaChannel, the producer and subscriber are unaware of the kafka consumption details (consumer group names etc) . The recommendation I provided is an EDA technique (even though not optimal since it introduces a level of coupling between producers and consumers) yet it's still just another "application design choice" to abstracted from the internals of the KafkaChannel. The code would work with IMC or any other channel needed without adding code that has a strong knowledge of the implementation detail of the KafkaChannel.

> ** If your subscriptions are being created by using automation, avoid using the current version of Kafka channels included with {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0 for mission critical or time sensitive systems where some issues being lost when subscriptions are created is unacceptable.

Reviewer 6: I think you misunderstood me here. I proposed to add recommendations in case automation (terraform, Ansible, user operator) is used to deploy user's app. Then user can add additional code to check if the Kafka offsets are already committed.

> ** If your subscriptions are being created by using automation, avoid using the current version of Kafka channels included with {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0 for mission critical or time sensitive systems where some issues being lost when subscriptions are created is unacceptable.

Reviewer 5: Understood. I guess my suggestion was more generic to cover cases where it's a "deployment automation" or a "programmatic creation" of the subscriptions / sources. So I think it still covers this case.

** The `v1alpha1` version of the `KafkaChannel` API, which was deprecated in {ServerlessProductName} version 1.14.0, has been removed. If the `ChannelTemplateSpec` parameters of your config maps contain references to this older version, you must update this part of the spec to use the correct API version.

[id="fixed-issues-1-17-0_{context}"]
== Fixed issues

[id="known-issues-1-17-0_{context}"]
== Known issues

* If you try to use an older version of the Knative `kn` CLI with a newer {ServerlessProductName} release, the API is not found and an error occurs.
+
For example, if you use the 1.16.0 release of the `kn` CLI, which uses version 0.22.0, with the 1.17.0 {ServerlessProductName} release, which uses the 0.23.0 versions of the Knative Serving and Knative Eventing APIs, the CLI does not work because it continues to look for the outdated 0.22.0 API versions.
+
Ensure that you are using the latest `kn` CLI version for your {ServerlessProductName} release to avoid issues.

* Kafka channel metrics are not monitored or shown in the corresponding web console dashboard in this release. This is due to a breaking change in the Kafka dispatcher reconciling process.

> * If you create a new subscription for a Kafka channel, or a new sink for a Kafka source, there might be a delay in the Kafka data plane becoming ready to dispatch messages after the newly created subscription or sink reports a ready status.
> +
> As a result, messages that are sent during the time which the data plane is not reporting a ready status might not be delivered to the subscriber or sink.
> +
> The following steps are recommended to mitigate this issue:
> 
> ** Schedule a maintenance window for updates, during which the Kafka channel or source is not expected to receive events.
> ** If you are creating subscriptions or sinks manually, verify that your events are being received, by using one of the following methods:
> *** Use safe validation events such as heartbeat, ephemeral, or test events, if your use case allows it.
> *** Check your Kafka topics for committed offsets.
> +
> After you have verified that events are being received, it is safe to continue using your subscriptions as usual.
> 
> ** If your subscriptions are being created by using automation, and:
> *** you are using the current version of Kafka components included with  {ServerlessProductName} 1.17.0, and
> *** you are using a mission critical or time sensitive system, where subscriptions or sinks missing events after creation is unacceptable,
> +
> introduce an acknowledgement technique between the producer and subscribers, such as initial heartbeats, which signal that the subscriber is receiving the events.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* If you create a new subscription for a Kafka channel, or a new Kafka source, there might be a delay in the Kafka data plane becoming ready to dispatch messages after the newly created subscription or sink reports a ready status.
+
As a result, messages that are sent during the time which the data plane is not reporting a ready status might not be delivered to the subscriber or sink.
+
// See more detailed information about this case, mitigation and recovery under LINK
```
